Elementary algebra
b'Elementary algebra encompasses some of the basic concepts of algebra, one of the main branches of mathematics. It is typically taught to secondary school students and builds on their understanding of arithmetic. Whereas arithmetic deals with specified numbers,[1] algebra introduces quantities without fixed values, known as variables.[2] This use of variables entails a use of algebraic notation and an understanding of the general rules of the operators introduced in arithmetic. Unlike abstract algebra, elementary algebra is not concerned with algebraic structures outside the realm of real and complex numbers.'b'The use of variables to denote quantities allows general relationships between quantities to be formally and concisely expressed, and thus enables solving a broader scope of problems. Many quantitative relationships in science and mathematics are expressed as algebraic equations.'b''b''b'Elementary algebra builds on and extends arithmetic[20] by introducing letters called variables to represent general (non-specified) numbers. This is useful for several reasons.'b'Algebraic expressions may be evaluated and simplified, based on the basic properties of arithmetic operations (addition, subtraction, multiplication, division and exponentiation). For example,'b'If x and y are integers, rationals, or real numbers, then xy=0 implies x=0 or y=0. Suppose abc=0. Then, substituting a for x and bc for y, we learn a=0 or bc=0. Then we can substitute again, letting x=b and y=c, to show that if bc=0 then b=0 or c=0. Therefore, if abc=0, then a=0 or (b=0 or c=0), so abc=0 implies a=0 or b=0 or c=0.'b'Consider if the original fact were stated as "ab=0 implies a=0 or b=0." Then when we say "suppose abc=0," we have a conflict of terms when we substitute. Yet the above logic is still valid to show that if abc=0 then a=0 or b=0 or c=0 if instead of letting a=a and b=bc we substitute a for a and b for bc (and with bc=0, substituting b for a and c for b). This shows that substituting for the terms in a statement isn\'t always the same as letting the terms from the statement equal the substituted terms. In this situation it\'s clear that if we substitute an expression a into the a term of the original equation, the a substituted does not refer to the a in the statement "ab=0 implies a=0 or b=0."'b'The following sections lay out examples of some of the types of algebraic equations that may be encountered.'b'Linear equations are so-called, because when they are plotted, they describe a straight line. The simplest equations to solve are linear equations that have only one variable. They contain only constant numbers and a single variable without an exponent. As an example, consider:'b'To solve this kind of equation, the technique is add, subtract, multiply, or divide both sides of the equation by the same number in order to isolate the variable on one side of the equation. Once the variable is isolated, the other side of the equation is the value of the variable.[32] This problem and its solution are as follows:'b'In words: the child is 4 years old.'b'A linear equation with two variables has many (i.e. an infinite number of) solutions.[33] For example:'b"This cannot be worked out by itself. If the son's age was made known, then there would no longer be two unknowns (variables), and the problem becomes a linear equation with just one variable, that can be solved as described above."b'To solve a linear equation with two variables (unknowns), requires two related equations. For example, if it was also revealed that:'b'Now there are two related linear equations, each with two unknowns, which enables the production of a linear equation with just one variable, by subtracting one from the other (called the elimination method):[34]'b'In other words, the son is aged 12, and since the father 22 years older, he must be 34. In 10 years time, the son will be 22, and the father will be twice his age, 44. This problem is illustrated on the associated plot of the equations.'b'For other ways to solve this kind of equations, see below, System of linear equations.'b'where the symbol "\xc2\xb1" indicates that both'b'are solutions of the quadratic equation.'b'Quadratic equations can also be solved using factorization (the reverse process of which is expansion, but for two linear terms is sometimes denoted foiling). As an example of factoring:'b'which is the same thing as'b'has no real number solution since no real number squared equals \xe2\x88\x921. Sometimes a quadratic equation has a root of multiplicity 2, such as:'b'For this equation, \xe2\x88\x921 is a root of multiplicity 2. This means \xe2\x88\x921 appears two times, since the equation can be rewritten in factored form as'b'All quadratic equations have exactly two solutions in complex numbers (but they may be equal to each other), a category that includes real numbers, imaginary numbers, and sums of real and imaginary numbers. Complex numbers first arise in the teaching of quadratic equations and the quadratic formula. For example, the quadratic equation'b'has solutions'b'then, by subtracting 1 from both sides of the equation, and then dividing both sides by 3 we obtain'b'whence'b'or'b'For example, if'b'then, by adding 2 to both sides of the equation, followed by dividing both sides by 4, we get'b'whence'b'from which we obtain'b'equivalently'b'equivalently'b'For example, if:'b'then'b'There are different methods to solve a system of linear equations with two variables.'b'An example of solving a system of linear equations is by using the elimination method:'b'Multiplying the terms in the second equation by 2:'b'Adding the two equations together to get:'b'which simplifies to'b'Another way of solving the same system of linear equations is by substitution.'b'and multiplying by \xe2\x88\x921:'b'Adding 2 on each side of the equation:'b'which simplifies to'b'Using this value in one of the equations, the same solution as in the previous method is obtained.'b'In the above example, a solution exists. However, there are also systems of equations which do not have any solution. Such a system is called inconsistent. An obvious example is'b'As 0\xe2\x89\xa02, the second equation in the system has no solution. Therefore, the system has no solution. However, not all inconsistent systems are recognized at first sight. As an example, let us consider the system'b'Multiplying by 2 both sides of the second equation, and adding it to the first one results in'b'which has clearly no solution.'b'And using this value in the first equation in the system:'b'Systems with more variables than the number of linear equations are called underdetermined. Such a system, if it has any solutions, does not have a unique one but rather an infinitude of them. An example of such a system is'b'When trying to solve it, one is led to express some variables as functions of the other ones if any solutions exist, but cannot express all solutions numerically because there are an infinite number of them if there are any.'b'A system with a greater number of equations than variables is called overdetermined. If an overdetermined system has any solutions, necessarily some equations are linear combinations of the others.'
Euclidean space
b'In geometry, Euclidean space encompasses the two-dimensional Euclidean plane, the three-dimensional space of Euclidean geometry, and certain other spaces. It is named after the Ancient Greek mathematician Euclid of Alexandria.[1] The term "Euclidean" distinguishes these spaces from other types of spaces considered in modern geometry. Euclidean spaces also generalize to higher dimensions.'b'Classical Greek geometry defined the Euclidean plane and Euclidean three-dimensional space using certain postulates, while the other properties of these spaces were deduced as theorems. Geometric constructions are also used to define rational numbers. When algebra and mathematical analysis became developed enough, this relation reversed and now it is more common to define Euclidean space using Cartesian coordinates and the ideas of analytic geometry. It means that points of the space are specified with collections of real numbers, and geometric shapes are defined as equations and inequalities. This approach brings the tools of algebra and calculus to bear on questions of geometry and has the advantage that it generalizes easily to Euclidean spaces of more than three dimensions.'b'From the modern viewpoint, there is essentially only one Euclidean space of each dimension. While Euclidean space is defined by a set of axioms, these axioms do not specify how the points are to be represented.[2] Euclidean space can, as one possible choice of representation, be modeled using Cartesian coordinates. In this case, the Euclidean space is then modeled by the real coordinate space (Rn) of the same dimension. In one dimension, this is the real line; in two dimensions, it is the Cartesian plane; and in higher dimensions it is a coordinate space with three or more real number coordinates. Mathematicians denote the n-dimensional Euclidean space by En if they wish to emphasize its Euclidean nature, but Rn is used as well since the latter is assumed to have the standard Euclidean structure, and these two structures are not always distinguished. Euclidean spaces have finite dimension.[3]'b''b''b'One way to think of the Euclidean plane is as a set of points satisfying certain relationships, expressible in terms of distance and angle. For example, there are two fundamental operations (referred to as motions) on the plane. One is translation, which means a shifting of the plane so that every point is shifted in the same direction and by the same distance. The other is rotation about a fixed point in the plane, in which every point in the plane turns about that fixed point through the same angle. One of the basic tenets of Euclidean geometry is that two figures (usually considered as subsets) of the plane should be considered equivalent (congruent) if one can be transformed into the other by some sequence of translations, rotations and reflections (see below).'b'In order to make all of this mathematically precise, the theory must clearly define the notions of distance, angle, translation, and rotation for a mathematically described space. Even when used in physical theories, Euclidean space is an abstraction detached from actual physical locations, specific reference frames, measurement instruments, and so on. A purely mathematical definition of Euclidean space also ignores questions of units of length and other physical dimensions: the distance in a "mathematical" space is a number, not something expressed in inches or metres. The standard way to define such space, as carried out in the remainder of this article, is to define the Euclidean plane as a two-dimensional real vector space equipped with an inner product.[3] The reason for working with arbitrary vector spaces instead of Rn is that it is often preferable to work in a coordinate-free manner (that is, without choosing a preferred basis). For then:'b'Once the Euclidean plane has been described in this language, it is actually a simple matter to extend its concept to arbitrary dimensions. For the most part, the vocabulary, formulae, and calculations are not made any more difficult by the presence of more dimensions. (However, rotations are more subtle in high dimensions, and visualizing high-dimensional spaces remains difficult, even for experienced mathematicians.)'b'A Euclidean space is not technically a vector space but rather an affine space, on which a vector space acts by translations, or, conversely, a Euclidean vector is the difference (displacement) in an ordered pair of points, not a single point. Intuitively, the distinction says merely that there is no canonical choice of where the origin should go in the space, because it can be translated anywhere. When a certain point is chosen, it can be declared the origin and subsequent calculations may ignore the difference between a point and its coordinate vector, as said above. See point\xe2\x80\x93vector distinction for details.'b'These are distances between points and the angles between lines or vectors, which satisfy certain conditions (see below), which makes a set of points a Euclidean space. The natural way to obtain these quantities is by introducing and using the standard inner product (also known as the dot product) on Rn.[3] The inner product of any two real n-vectors x and y is defined by'b'where xi and yi are ith coordinates of vectors x and y respectively. The result is always a real number.'b'The inner product of x with itself is always non-negative. This product allows us to define the "length" of a vector x through square root:'b'This length function satisfies the required properties of a norm and is called the Euclidean norm on Rn.'b'Finally, one can use the norm to define a metric (or distance function) on Rn by'b'This distance function is called the Euclidean metric. This formula expresses a special case of the Pythagorean theorem.'b'This distance function (which makes a metric space) is sufficient to define all Euclidean geometry, including the dot product. Thus, a real coordinate space together with this Euclidean structure is called Euclidean space. Its vectors form an inner product space (in fact a Hilbert space), and a normed vector space.'b'The metric space structure is the main reason behind the use of real numbers R, not some other ordered field, as the mathematical foundation of Euclidean (and many other) spaces. Euclidean space is a complete metric space, a property which is impossible to achieve operating over rational numbers, for example.'b'The (non-reflex) angle \xce\xb8 (0\xc2\xb0 \xe2\x89\xa4 \xce\xb8 \xe2\x89\xa4 180\xc2\xb0) between vectors x and y is then given by'b'where arccos is the arccosine function. It is useful only for n > 1,[footnote 1] and the case n = 2 is somewhat special. Namely, on an oriented Euclidean plane one can define an angle between two vectors as a number defined modulo 1 turn (usually denoted as either 2\xcf\x80 or 360\xc2\xb0), such that \xe2\x88\xa0y\xe2\x80\x89x = \xe2\x88\x92\xe2\x88\xa0x\xe2\x80\x89y. This oriented angle is equal either to the angle \xce\xb8 from the formula above or to \xe2\x88\x92\xce\xb8. If one non-zero vector is fixed (such as the first basis vector), then each non-zero vector is uniquely defined by its magnitude and angle.'b'The angle does not change if vectors x and y are multiplied by positive numbers.'b'Unlike the aforementioned situation with distance, the scale of angles is the same in pure mathematics, physics, and computing. It does not depend on the scale of distances; all distances may be multiplied by some fixed factor, and all angles will be preserved. Usually, the angle is considered a dimensionless quantity, but there are different units of measurement, such as radian (preferred in pure mathematics and theoretical physics) and degree (\xc2\xb0) (preferred in most applications).'b'Symmetries of a Euclidean space are transformations which preserve the Euclidean metric (called isometries). Although aforementioned translations are most obvious of them, they have the same structure for any affine space and do not show a distinctive character of Euclidean geometry. Another family of symmetries leave one point fixed, which may be seen as the origin without loss of generality. All transformations, which preserves the origin and the Euclidean metric, are linear maps. Such transformations Q must, for any x and y, satisfy:'b'Such transforms constitute a group called the orthogonal group O(n). Its elements Q are exactly solutions of a matrix equation'b'where QT is the transpose of Q and I is the identity matrix.'b'But a Euclidean space is orientable.[footnote 2] Each of these transformations either preserves or reverses orientation depending on whether its determinant is +1 or \xe2\x88\x921 respectively. Only transformations which preserve orientation, which form the special orthogonal group SO(n), are considered (proper) rotations. This group has, as a Lie group, the same dimension n(n \xe2\x88\x92 1) /2 and is the identity component of O(n).'b'Groups SO(n) are well-studied for n \xe2\x89\xa4 4. There are no non-trivial rotations in 0- and 1-spaces. Rotations of a Euclidean plane (n = 2) are parametrized by the angle (modulo 1 turn). Rotations of a 3-space are parametrized with axis and angle, whereas a rotation of a 4-space is a superposition of two 2-dimensional rotations around perpendicular planes.'b'Among linear transforms in O(n) which reverse the orientation are hyperplane reflections. This is the only possible case for n \xe2\x89\xa4 2, but starting from three dimensions, such isometry in the general position is a rotoreflection.'b'The Euclidean group E(n), also referred to as the group of all isometries ISO(n), treats translations, rotations, and reflections in a uniform way, considering them as group actions in the context of group theory, and especially in Lie group theory. These group actions preserve the Euclidean structure.'b'As the group of all isometries, ISO(n), the Euclidean group is important because it makes Euclidean geometry a case of Klein geometry, a theoretical framework including many alternative geometries.'b'The structure of Euclidean spaces \xe2\x80\x93 distances, lines, vectors, angles (up to sign), and so on \xe2\x80\x93 is invariant under the transformations of their associated Euclidean group. For instance, translations form a commutative subgroup that acts freely and transitively on En, while the stabilizer of any point there is the aforementioned O(n).'b'Along with translations, rotations, reflections, as well as the identity transformation, Euclidean motions comprise also glide reflections (for n \xe2\x89\xa5 2), screw operations and rotoreflections (for n \xe2\x89\xa5 3), and even more complex combinations of primitive transformations for n \xe2\x89\xa5 4.'b'The group structure determines which conditions a metric space needs to satisfy to be a Euclidean space:'b'Cartesian coordinates are arguably the standard, but not the only possible option for a Euclidean space. Skew coordinates are compatible with the affine structure of En, but make formulae for angles and distances more complicated.'b'Another approach, which goes in line with ideas of differential geometry and conformal geometry, is orthogonal coordinates, where coordinate hypersurfaces of different coordinates are orthogonal, although curved. Examples include the polar coordinate system on Euclidean plane, the second important plane coordinate system.'b'See below about expression of the Euclidean structure in curvilinear coordinates.'b'The simplest (after points) objects in Euclidean space are flats, or Euclidean subspaces of lesser dimension. Points are 0-dimensional flats, 1-dimensional flats are called (straight) lines, and 2-dimensional flats are planes. (n \xe2\x88\x92 1)-dimensional flats are called hyperplanes.'b'Any two distinct points lie on exactly one line. Any line and a point outside it lie on exactly one plane. More generally, the properties of flats and their incidence of Euclidean space are shared with affine geometry, whereas the affine geometry is devoid of distances and angles.'b'The sum of angles of a triangle is an important problem, which exerted a great influence to 19th-century mathematics. In a Euclidean space it invariably equals to 180\xc2\xb0, or a half-turn'b'This is not only a line which a pair (A,\xe2\x80\x89B) of distinct points defines. Points on the line which lie between A and B, together with A and B themselves, constitute a line segment A\xe2\x80\x89B. Any line segment has the length, which equals to distance between A and B. If A = B, then the segment is degenerate and its length equals to 0, otherwise the length is positive.'b'A (non-degenerate) triangle is defined by three points not lying on the same line. Any triangle lies on one plane. The concept of triangle is not specific to Euclidean spaces, but Euclidean triangles have numerous special properties and define many derived objects.'b'A triangle can be thought of as a 3-gon on a plane, a special (and the first meaningful in Euclidean geometry) case of a polygon.'b'Polytope is a concept that generalizes polygons on a plane and polyhedra in 3-dimensional space (which are among the earliest studied geometrical objects). A simplex is a generalization of a line segment (1-simplex) and a triangle (2-simplex). A tetrahedron is a 3-simplex.'b'The concept of a polytope belongs to affine geometry, which is more general than Euclidean. But Euclidean geometry distinguish regular polytopes. For example, affine geometry does not see the difference between an equilateral triangle and a right triangle, but in Euclidean space the former is regular and the latter is not.'b'Root systems are special sets of Euclidean vectors. A root system is often identical to the set of vertices of a regular polytope.'b'Since Euclidean space is a metric space, it is also a topological space with the natural topology induced by the metric. The metric topology on En is called the Euclidean topology, and it is identical to the standard topology on Rn. A set is open if and only if it contains an open ball around each of its points; in other words, open balls form a base of the topology. The topological dimension of the Euclidean n-space equals n, which implies that spaces of different dimension are not homeomorphic. A finer result is the invariance of domain, which proves that any subset of n-space, that is (with its subspace topology) homeomorphic to an open subset of n-space, is itself open.'b'Aside from countless uses in fundamental mathematics, a Euclidean model of the physical space can be used to solve many practical problems with sufficient precision. Two usual approaches are a fixed, or stationary reference frame (i.e. the description of a motion of objects as their positions that change continuously with time), and the use of Galilean space-time symmetry (such as in Newtonian mechanics). To both of them the modern Euclidean geometry provides a convenient formalism; for example, the space of Galilean velocities is itself a Euclidean space (see relative velocity for details).'b'Topographical maps and technical drawings are planar Euclidean. An idea behind them is the scale invariance of Euclidean geometry, that permits to represent large objects in a small sheet of paper, or a screen.'b'Although Euclidean spaces are no longer considered to be the only possible setting for a geometry, they act as prototypes for other geometric objects. Ideas and terminology from Euclidean geometry (both traditional and analytic) are pervasive in modern mathematics, where other geometric objects share many similarities with Euclidean spaces, share part of their structure, or embed Euclidean spaces.'b"A smooth manifold is a Hausdorff topological space that is locally diffeomorphic to Euclidean space. Diffeomorphism does not respect distance and angle, but if one additionally prescribes a smoothly varying inner product on the manifold's tangent spaces, then the result is what is called a Riemannian manifold. Put differently, a Riemannian manifold is a space constructed by deforming and patching together Euclidean spaces. Such a space enjoys notions of distance and angle, but they behave in a curved, non-Euclidean manner. The simplest Riemannian manifold, consisting of Rn with a constant inner product, is essentially identical to Euclidean n-space itself. Less trivial examples are n-sphere and hyperbolic spaces. Discovery of the latter in the 19th century was branded as the non-Euclidean geometry."b'Also, the concept of a Riemannian manifold permits an expression of the Euclidean structure in any smooth coordinate system, via metric tensor. From this tensor one can compute the Riemann curvature tensor. Where the latter equals to zero, the metric structure is locally Euclidean (it means that at least some open set in the coordinate space is isometric to a piece of Euclidean space), no matter whether coordinates are affine or curvilinear.'b'If one replaces the inner product of a Euclidean space with an indefinite quadratic form, the result is a pseudo-Euclidean space. Smooth manifolds built from such spaces are called pseudo-Riemannian manifolds. Perhaps their most famous application is the theory of relativity, where flat spacetime is a pseudo-Euclidean space called Minkowski space, where rotations correspond to motions of hyperbolic spaces mentioned above. Further generalization to curved spacetimes form pseudo-Riemannian manifolds, such as in general relativity.'b'Another line of generalization is to consider other number fields than one of real numbers. Over complex numbers, a Hilbert space can be seen as a generalization of Euclidean dot product structure, although the definition of the inner product becomes a sesquilinear form for compatibility with metric structure.'
Mathematics
b'Mathematics (from Greek \xce\xbc\xce\xac\xce\xb8\xce\xb7\xce\xbc\xce\xb1 m\xc3\xa1th\xc4\x93ma, "knowledge, study, learning") is the study of such topics as quantity,[1] structure,[2] space,[1] and change.[3][4][5] It has no generally accepted definition.[6][7]'b'Mathematicians seek out patterns[8][9] and use them to formulate new conjectures. Mathematicians resolve the truth or falsity of conjectures by mathematical proof. When mathematical structures are good models of real phenomena, then mathematical reasoning can provide insight or predictions about nature. Through the use of abstraction and logic, mathematics developed from counting, calculation, measurement, and the systematic study of the shapes and motions of physical objects. Practical mathematics has been a human activity from as far back as written records exist. The research required to solve mathematical problems can take years or even centuries of sustained inquiry.'b"Rigorous arguments first appeared in Greek mathematics, most notably in Euclid's Elements. Since the pioneering work of Giuseppe Peano (1858\xe2\x80\x931932), David Hilbert (1862\xe2\x80\x931943), and others on axiomatic systems in the late 19th\xc2\xa0century, it has become customary to view mathematical research as establishing truth by rigorous deduction from appropriately chosen axioms and definitions. Mathematics developed at a relatively slow pace until the Renaissance, when mathematical innovations interacting with new scientific discoveries led to a rapid increase in the rate of mathematical discovery that has continued to the present day.[10]"b'Galileo Galilei (1564\xe2\x80\x931642) said, "The universe cannot be read until we have learned the language and become familiar with the characters in which it is written. It is written in mathematical language, and the letters are triangles, circles and other geometrical figures, without which means it is humanly impossible to comprehend a single word. Without these, one is wandering about in a dark labyrinth."[11] Carl Friedrich Gauss (1777\xe2\x80\x931855) referred to mathematics as "the Queen of the Sciences".[12] Benjamin Peirce (1809\xe2\x80\x931880) called mathematics "the science that draws necessary conclusions".[13] David Hilbert said of mathematics: "We are not speaking here of arbitrariness in any sense. Mathematics is not like a game whose tasks are determined by arbitrarily stipulated rules. Rather, it is a conceptual system possessing internal necessity that can only be so and by no means otherwise."[14] Albert Einstein (1879\xe2\x80\x931955) stated that "as far as the laws of mathematics refer to reality, they are not certain; and as far as they are certain, they do not refer to reality."[15]'b'Mathematics is essential in many fields, including natural science, engineering, medicine, finance and the social sciences. Applied mathematics has led to entirely new mathematical disciplines, such as statistics and game theory. Mathematicians also engage in pure mathematics, or mathematics for its own sake, without having any application in mind. There is no clear line separating pure and applied mathematics, and practical applications for what began as pure mathematics are often discovered.[16]'b'The history of mathematics can be seen as an ever-increasing series of abstractions. The first abstraction, which is shared by many animals,[17] was probably that of numbers: the realization that a collection of two apples and a collection of two oranges (for example) have something in common, namely quantity of their members.'b'As evidenced by tallies found on bone, in addition to recognizing how to count physical objects, prehistoric peoples may have also recognized how to count abstract quantities, like time\xc2\xa0\xe2\x80\x93 days, seasons, years.[18]'b'Evidence for more complex mathematics does not appear until around 3000\xc2\xa0BC, when the Babylonians and Egyptians began using arithmetic, algebra and geometry for taxation and other financial calculations, for building and construction, and for astronomy.[19] The earliest uses of mathematics were in trading, land measurement, painting and weaving patterns and the recording of time.'b'In Babylonian mathematics, elementary arithmetic (addition, subtraction, multiplication and division) first appears in the archaeological record. Numeracy pre-dated writing and numeral systems have been many and diverse, with the first known written numerals created by Egyptians in Middle Kingdom texts such as the Rhind Mathematical Papyrus.[citation needed]'b'Between 600 and 300\xc2\xa0BC the Ancient Greeks began a systematic study of mathematics in its own right with Greek mathematics.[20]'b'During the Golden Age of Islam, especially during the 9th and 10th\xc2\xa0centuries, mathematics saw many important innovations building on Greek mathematics: most of them include the contributions from Persian mathematicians such as Al-Khwarismi, Omar Khayyam and Sharaf al-D\xc4\xabn al-\xe1\xb9\xac\xc5\xabs\xc4\xab.'b'Mathematics has since been greatly extended, and there has been a fruitful interaction between mathematics and science, to the benefit of both. Mathematical discoveries continue to be made today. According to Mikhail B. Sevryuk, in the January\xc2\xa02006 issue of the Bulletin of the American Mathematical Society, "The number of papers and books included in the Mathematical Reviews database since 1940 (the first year of operation of MR) is now more than 1.9\xc2\xa0million, and more than 75\xc2\xa0thousand items are added to the database each year. The overwhelming majority of works in this ocean contain new mathematical theorems and their proofs."[21]'b'The word mathematics comes from Ancient Greek \xce\xbc\xce\xac\xce\xb8\xce\xb7\xce\xbc\xce\xb1 (m\xc3\xa1th\xc4\x93ma), meaning "that which is learnt",[22] "what one gets to know", hence also "study" and "science". The word for "mathematics" came to have the narrower and more technical meaning "mathematical study" even in Classical times.[23] Its adjective is \xce\xbc\xce\xb1\xce\xb8\xce\xb7\xce\xbc\xce\xb1\xcf\x84\xce\xb9\xce\xba\xcf\x8c\xcf\x82 (math\xc4\x93matik\xc3\xb3s), meaning "related to learning" or "studious", which likewise further came to mean "mathematical". In particular, \xce\xbc\xce\xb1\xce\xb8\xce\xb7\xce\xbc\xce\xb1\xcf\x84\xce\xb9\xce\xba\xe1\xbd\xb4 \xcf\x84\xce\xad\xcf\x87\xce\xbd\xce\xb7 (math\xc4\x93matik\xe1\xb8\x97 t\xc3\xa9khn\xc4\x93), Latin: ars mathematica, meant "the mathematical art".'b'Similarly, one of the two main schools of thought in Pythagoreanism was known as the math\xc4\x93matikoi (\xce\xbc\xce\xb1\xce\xb8\xce\xb7\xce\xbc\xce\xb1\xcf\x84\xce\xb9\xce\xba\xce\xbf\xce\xaf)\xe2\x80\x94which at the time meant "teachers" rather than "mathematicians" in the modern sense.'b'In Latin, and in English until around 1700, the term mathematics more commonly meant "astrology" (or sometimes "astronomy") rather than "mathematics"; the meaning gradually changed to its present one from about 1500 to 1800. This has resulted in several mistranslations. For example, Saint Augustine\'s warning that Christians should beware of mathematici, meaning astrologers, is sometimes mistranslated as a condemnation of mathematicians.[24]'b'The apparent plural form in English, like the French plural form les math\xc3\xa9matiques (and the less commonly used singular derivative la math\xc3\xa9matique), goes back to the Latin neuter plural mathematica (Cicero), based on the Greek plural \xcf\x84\xce\xb1 \xce\xbc\xce\xb1\xce\xb8\xce\xb7\xce\xbc\xce\xb1\xcf\x84\xce\xb9\xce\xba\xce\xac (ta math\xc4\x93matik\xc3\xa1), used by Aristotle (384\xe2\x80\x93322\xc2\xa0BC), and meaning roughly "all things mathematical"; although it is plausible that English borrowed only the adjective mathematic(al) and formed the noun mathematics anew, after the pattern of physics and metaphysics, which were inherited from Greek.[25] In English, the noun mathematics takes a singular verb. It is often shortened to maths or, in English-speaking North America, math.[26]'b'Aristotle defined mathematics as "the science of quantity", and this definition prevailed until the 18th century.[27] Starting in the 19th\xc2\xa0century, when the study of mathematics increased in rigor and began to address abstract topics such as group theory and projective geometry, which have no clear-cut relation to quantity and measurement, mathematicians and philosophers began to propose a variety of new definitions.[28] Some of these definitions emphasize the deductive character of much of mathematics, some emphasize its abstractness, some emphasize certain topics within mathematics. Today, no consensus on the definition of mathematics prevails, even among professionals.[6] There is not even consensus on whether mathematics is an art or a science.[7] A great many professional mathematicians take no interest in a definition of mathematics, or consider it undefinable.[6] Some just say, "Mathematics is what mathematicians do."[6]'b'Three leading types of definition of mathematics are called logicist, intuitionist, and formalist, each reflecting a different philosophical school of thought.[29] All have severe problems, none has widespread acceptance, and no reconciliation seems possible.[29]'b'An early definition of mathematics in terms of logic was Benjamin Peirce\'s "the science that draws necessary conclusions" (1870).[30] In the Principia Mathematica, Bertrand Russell and Alfred North Whitehead advanced the philosophical program known as logicism, and attempted to prove that all mathematical concepts, statements, and principles can be defined and proved entirely in terms of symbolic logic. A logicist definition of mathematics is Russell\'s "All Mathematics is Symbolic Logic" (1903).[31]'b'Intuitionist definitions, developing from the philosophy of mathematician L.E.J. Brouwer, identify mathematics with certain mental phenomena. An example of an intuitionist definition is "Mathematics is the mental activity which consists in carrying out constructs one after the other."[29] A peculiarity of intuitionism is that it rejects some mathematical ideas considered valid according to other definitions. In particular, while other philosophies of mathematics allow objects that can be proved to exist even though they cannot be constructed, intuitionism allows only mathematical objects that one can actually construct.'b'Formalist definitions identify mathematics with its symbols and the rules for operating on them. Haskell Curry defined mathematics simply as "the science of formal systems".[32] A formal system is a set of symbols, or tokens, and some rules telling how the tokens may be combined into formulas. In formal systems, the word axiom has a special meaning, different from the ordinary meaning of "a self-evident truth". In formal systems, an axiom is a combination of tokens that is included in a given formal system without needing to be derived using the rules of the system.'b'The German mathematician Carl Friedrich Gauss referred to mathematics as "the Queen of the Sciences".[12] More recently, Marcus du Sautoy has called mathematics "the Queen of Science\xc2\xa0... the main driving force behind scientific discovery".[33] In the original Latin Regina Scientiarum, as well as in German K\xc3\xb6nigin der Wissenschaften, the word corresponding to science means a "field of knowledge", and this was the original meaning of "science" in English, also; mathematics is in this sense a field of knowledge. The specialization restricting the meaning of "science" to natural science follows the rise of Baconian science, which contrasted "natural science" to scholasticism, the Aristotelean method of inquiring from first principles. The role of empirical experimentation and observation is negligible in mathematics, compared to natural sciences such as biology, chemistry, or physics. Albert Einstein stated that "as far as the laws of mathematics refer to reality, they are not certain; and as far as they are certain, they do not refer to reality."[15]'b'Many philosophers believe that mathematics is not experimentally falsifiable, and thus not a science according to the definition of Karl Popper.[34] However, in the 1930s G\xc3\xb6del\'s incompleteness theorems convinced many mathematicians[who?] that mathematics cannot be reduced to logic alone, and Karl Popper concluded that "most mathematical theories are, like those of physics and biology, hypothetico-deductive: pure mathematics therefore turns out to be much closer to the natural sciences whose hypotheses are conjectures, than it seemed even recently."[35] Other thinkers, notably Imre Lakatos, have applied a version of falsificationism to mathematics itself.[citation needed]'b'An alternative view is that certain scientific fields (such as theoretical physics) are mathematics with axioms that are intended to correspond to reality. Mathematics shares much in common with many fields in the physical sciences, notably the exploration of the logical consequences of assumptions. Intuition and experimentation also play a role in the formulation of conjectures in both mathematics and the (other) sciences. Experimental mathematics continues to grow in importance within mathematics, and computation and simulation are playing an increasing role in both the sciences and mathematics.'b'The opinions of mathematicians on this matter are varied. Many mathematicians[who?] feel that to call their area a science is to downplay the importance of its aesthetic side, and its history in the traditional seven liberal arts; others[who?] feel that to ignore its connection to the sciences is to turn a blind eye to the fact that the interface between mathematics and its applications in science and engineering has driven much development in mathematics. One way this difference of viewpoint plays out is in the philosophical debate as to whether mathematics is created (as in art) or discovered (as in science). It is common to see universities divided into sections that include a division of Science and Mathematics, indicating that the fields are seen as being allied but that they do not coincide. In practice, mathematicians are typically grouped with scientists at the gross level but separated at finer levels. This is one of many issues considered in the philosophy of mathematics.[citation needed]'b"Mathematics arises from many different kinds of problems. At first these were found in commerce, land measurement, architecture and later astronomy; today, all sciences suggest problems studied by mathematicians, and many problems arise within mathematics itself. For example, the physicist Richard Feynman invented the path integral formulation of quantum mechanics using a combination of mathematical reasoning and physical insight, and today's string theory, a still-developing scientific theory which attempts to unify the four fundamental forces of nature, continues to inspire new mathematics.[36]"b'Some mathematics is relevant only in the area that inspired it, and is applied to solve further problems in that area. But often mathematics inspired by one area proves useful in many areas, and joins the general stock of mathematical concepts. A distinction is often made between pure mathematics and applied mathematics. However pure mathematics topics often turn out to have applications, e.g. number theory in cryptography. This remarkable fact, that even the "purest" mathematics often turns out to have practical applications, is what Eugene Wigner has called "the unreasonable effectiveness of mathematics".[37] As in most areas of study, the explosion of knowledge in the scientific age has led to specialization: there are now hundreds of specialized areas in mathematics and the latest Mathematics Subject Classification runs to 46\xc2\xa0pages.[38] Several areas of applied mathematics have merged with related traditions outside of mathematics and become disciplines in their own right, including statistics, operations research, and computer science.'b'For those who are mathematically inclined, there is often a definite aesthetic aspect to much of mathematics. Many mathematicians talk about the elegance of mathematics, its intrinsic aesthetics and inner beauty. Simplicity and generality are valued. There is beauty in a simple and elegant proof, such as Euclid\'s proof that there are infinitely many prime numbers, and in an elegant numerical method that speeds calculation, such as the fast Fourier transform. G.H. Hardy in A Mathematician\'s Apology expressed the belief that these aesthetic considerations are, in themselves, sufficient to justify the study of pure mathematics. He identified criteria such as significance, unexpectedness, inevitability, and economy as factors that contribute to a mathematical aesthetic.[39] Mathematicians often strive to find proofs that are particularly elegant, proofs from "The Book" of God according to Paul Erd\xc5\x91s.[40][41] The popularity of recreational mathematics is another sign of the pleasure many find in solving mathematical questions.'b'Most of the mathematical notation in use today was not invented until the 16th century.[42] Before that, mathematics was written out in words, limiting mathematical discovery.[43] Euler (1707\xe2\x80\x931783) was responsible for many of the notations in use today. Modern notation makes mathematics much easier for the professional, but beginners often find it daunting. According to Barbara Oakley, this can be attributed to the fact that mathematical ideas are both more abstract and more encrypted than those of natural language.[44] Unlike natural language, where people can often equate a word (such as cow) with the physical object it corresponds to, mathematical symbols are abstract, lacking any physical analog.[45] Mathematical symbols are also more highly encrypted than regular words, meaning a single symbol can encode a number of different operations or ideas.[46]'b'Mathematical language can be difficult to understand for beginners because even common terms, such as or and only, have a more precise meaning than they have in everyday speech, and other terms such as open and field refer to specific mathematical ideas, not covered by their laymen\'s meanings. Mathematical language also includes many technical terms such as homeomorphism and integrable that have no meaning outside of mathematics. Additionally, shorthand phrases such as iff for "if and only if" belong to mathematical jargon. There is a reason for special notation and technical vocabulary: mathematics requires more precision than everyday speech. Mathematicians refer to this precision of language and logic as "rigor".'b'Mathematical proof is fundamentally a matter of rigor. Mathematicians want their theorems to follow from axioms by means of systematic reasoning. This is to avoid mistaken "theorems", based on fallible intuitions, of which many instances have occurred in the history of the subject.[b] The level of rigor expected in mathematics has varied over time: the Greeks expected detailed arguments, but at the time of Isaac Newton the methods employed were less rigorous. Problems inherent in the definitions used by Newton would lead to a resurgence of careful analysis and formal proof in the 19th\xc2\xa0century. Misunderstanding the rigor is a cause for some of the common misconceptions of mathematics. Today, mathematicians continue to argue among themselves about computer-assisted proofs. Since large computations are hard to verify, such proofs may not be sufficiently rigorous.[47]'b'Axioms in traditional thought were "self-evident truths", but that conception is problematic.[48] At a formal level, an axiom is just a string of symbols, which has an intrinsic meaning only in the context of all derivable formulas of an axiomatic system. It was the goal of Hilbert\'s program to put all of mathematics on a firm axiomatic basis, but according to G\xc3\xb6del\'s incompleteness theorem every (sufficiently powerful) axiomatic system has undecidable formulas; and so a final axiomatization of mathematics is impossible. Nonetheless mathematics is often imagined to be (as far as its formal content) nothing but set theory in some axiomatization, in the sense that every mathematical statement or proof could be cast into formulas within set theory.[49]'b'Mathematics can, broadly speaking, be subdivided into the study of quantity, structure, space, and change (i.e. arithmetic, algebra, geometry, and analysis). In addition to these main concerns, there are also subdivisions dedicated to exploring links from the heart of mathematics to other fields: to logic, to set theory (foundations), to the empirical mathematics of the various sciences (applied mathematics), and more recently to the rigorous study of uncertainty. While some areas might seem unrelated, the Langlands program has found connections between areas previously thought unconnected, such as Galois groups, Riemann surfaces and number theory.'b'In order to clarify the foundations of mathematics, the fields of mathematical logic and set theory were developed. Mathematical logic includes the mathematical study of logic and the applications of formal logic to other areas of mathematics; set theory is the branch of mathematics that studies sets or collections of objects. Category theory, which deals in an abstract way with mathematical structures and relationships between them, is still in development. The phrase "crisis of foundations" describes the search for a rigorous foundation for mathematics that took place from approximately 1900 to 1930.[50] Some disagreement about the foundations of mathematics continues to the present day. The crisis of foundations was stimulated by a number of controversies at the time, including the controversy over Cantor\'s set theory and the Brouwer\xe2\x80\x93Hilbert controversy.'b"Mathematical logic is concerned with setting mathematics within a rigorous axiomatic framework, and studying the implications of such a framework. As such, it is home to G\xc3\xb6del's incompleteness theorems which (informally) imply that any effective formal system that contains basic arithmetic, if sound (meaning that all theorems that can be proved are true), is necessarily incomplete (meaning that there are true theorems which cannot be proved in that system). Whatever finite collection of number-theoretical axioms is taken as a foundation, G\xc3\xb6del showed how to construct a formal statement that is a true number-theoretical fact, but which does not follow from those axioms. Therefore, no formal system is a complete axiomatization of full number theory. Modern logic is divided into recursion theory, model theory, and proof theory, and is closely linked to theoretical computer science,[citation needed] as well as to category theory. In the context of recursion theory, the impossibility of a full axiomatization of number theory can also be formally demonstrated as a consequence of the MRDP theorem."b'Theoretical computer science includes computability theory, computational complexity theory, and information theory. Computability theory examines the limitations of various theoretical models of the computer, including the most well-known model\xc2\xa0\xe2\x80\x93 the Turing machine. Complexity theory is the study of tractability by computer; some problems, although theoretically solvable by computer, are so expensive in terms of time or space that solving them is likely to remain practically unfeasible, even with the rapid advancement of computer hardware. A famous problem is the "P = NP?" problem, one of the Millennium Prize Problems.[51] Finally, information theory is concerned with the amount of data that can be stored on a given medium, and hence deals with concepts such as compression and entropy.'b'The study of quantity starts with numbers, first the familiar natural numbers and integers ("whole numbers") and arithmetical operations on them, which are characterized in arithmetic. The deeper properties of integers are studied in number theory, from which come such popular results as Fermat\'s Last Theorem. The twin prime conjecture and Goldbach\'s conjecture are two unsolved problems in number theory.'b'As the number system is further developed, the integers are recognized as a subset of the rational numbers ("fractions"). These, in turn, are contained within the real numbers, which are used to represent continuous quantities. Real numbers are generalized to complex numbers. These are the first steps of a hierarchy of numbers that goes on to include quaternions and octonions. Consideration of the natural numbers also leads to the transfinite numbers, which formalize the concept of "infinity". According to the fundamental theorem of algebra all solutions of equations in one unknown with complex coefficients are complex numbers, regardless of degree. Another area of study is the size of sets, which is described with the cardinal numbers. These include the aleph numbers, which allow meaningful comparison of the size of infinitely large sets.'b'Many mathematical objects, such as sets of numbers and functions, exhibit internal structure as a consequence of operations or relations that are defined on the set. Mathematics then studies properties of those sets that can be expressed in terms of that structure; for instance number theory studies properties of the set of integers that can be expressed in terms of arithmetic operations. Moreover, it frequently happens that different such structured sets (or structures) exhibit similar properties, which makes it possible, by a further step of abstraction, to state axioms for a class of structures, and then study at once the whole class of structures satisfying these axioms. Thus one can study groups, rings, fields and other abstract systems; together such studies (for structures defined by algebraic operations) constitute the domain of abstract algebra.'b'By its great generality, abstract algebra can often be applied to seemingly unrelated problems; for instance a number of ancient problems concerning compass and straightedge constructions were finally solved using Galois theory, which involves field theory and group theory. Another example of an algebraic theory is linear algebra, which is the general study of vector spaces, whose elements called vectors have both quantity and direction, and can be used to model (relations between) points in space. This is one example of the phenomenon that the originally unrelated areas of geometry and algebra have very strong interactions in modern mathematics. Combinatorics studies ways of enumerating the number of objects that fit a given structure.'b'The study of space originates with geometry\xc2\xa0\xe2\x80\x93 in particular, Euclidean geometry, which combines space and numbers, and encompasses the well-known Pythagorean theorem. Trigonometry is the branch of mathematics that deals with relationships between the sides and the angles of triangles and with the trigonometric functions. The modern study of space generalizes these ideas to include higher-dimensional geometry, non-Euclidean geometries (which play a central role in general relativity) and topology. Quantity and space both play a role in analytic geometry, differential geometry, and algebraic geometry. Convex and discrete geometry were developed to solve problems in number theory and functional analysis but now are pursued with an eye on applications in optimization and computer science. Within differential geometry are the concepts of fiber bundles and calculus on manifolds, in particular, vector and tensor calculus. Within algebraic geometry is the description of geometric objects as solution sets of polynomial equations, combining the concepts of quantity and space, and also the study of topological groups, which combine structure and space. Lie groups are used to study space, structure, and change. Topology in all its many ramifications may have been the greatest growth area in 20th-century mathematics; it includes point-set topology, set-theoretic topology, algebraic topology and differential topology. In particular, instances of modern-day topology are metrizability theory, axiomatic set theory, homotopy theory, and Morse theory. Topology also includes the now solved Poincar\xc3\xa9 conjecture, and the still unsolved areas of the Hodge conjecture. Other results in geometry and topology, including the four color theorem and Kepler conjecture, have been proved only with the help of computers.'b'Understanding and describing change is a common theme in the natural sciences, and calculus was developed as a powerful tool to investigate it. Functions arise here, as a central concept describing a changing quantity. The rigorous study of real numbers and functions of a real variable is known as real analysis, with complex analysis the equivalent field for the complex numbers. Functional analysis focuses attention on (typically infinite-dimensional) spaces of functions. One of many applications of functional analysis is quantum mechanics. Many problems lead naturally to relationships between a quantity and its rate of change, and these are studied as differential equations. Many phenomena in nature can be described by dynamical systems; chaos theory makes precise the ways in which many of these systems exhibit unpredictable yet still deterministic behavior.'b'Applied mathematics concerns itself with mathematical methods that are typically used in science, engineering, business, and industry. Thus, "applied mathematics" is a mathematical science with specialized knowledge. The term applied mathematics also describes the professional specialty in which mathematicians work on practical problems; as a profession focused on practical problems, applied mathematics focuses on the "formulation, study, and use of mathematical models" in science, engineering, and other areas of mathematical practice.'b'In the past, practical applications have motivated the development of mathematical theories, which then became the subject of study in pure mathematics, where mathematics is developed primarily for its own sake. Thus, the activity of applied mathematics is vitally connected with research in pure mathematics.'b'Applied mathematics has significant overlap with the discipline of statistics, whose theory is formulated mathematically, especially with probability theory. Statisticians (working as part of a research project) "create data that makes sense" with random sampling and with randomized experiments;[52] the design of a statistical sample or experiment specifies the analysis of the data (before the data be available). When reconsidering data from experiments and samples or when analyzing data from observational studies, statisticians "make sense of the data" using the art of modelling and the theory of inference\xc2\xa0\xe2\x80\x93 with model selection and estimation; the estimated models and consequential predictions should be tested on new data.[c]'b'Statistical theory studies decision problems such as minimizing the risk (expected loss) of a statistical action, such as using a procedure in, for example, parameter estimation, hypothesis testing, and selecting the best. In these traditional areas of mathematical statistics, a statistical-decision problem is formulated by minimizing an objective function, like expected loss or cost, under specific constraints: For example, designing a survey often involves minimizing the cost of estimating a population mean with a given level of confidence.[53] Because of its use of optimization, the mathematical theory of statistics shares concerns with other decision sciences, such as operations research, control theory, and mathematical economics.[54]'b'Computational mathematics proposes and studies methods for solving mathematical problems that are typically too large for human numerical capacity. Numerical analysis studies methods for problems in analysis using functional analysis and approximation theory; numerical analysis includes the study of approximation and discretization broadly with special concern for rounding errors. Numerical analysis and, more broadly, scientific computing also study non-analytic topics of mathematical science, especially algorithmic matrix and graph theory. Other areas of computational mathematics include computer algebra and symbolic computation.'b'Arguably the most prestigious award in mathematics is the Fields Medal,[55][56] established in 1936 and awarded every four years (except around World War II) to as many as four individuals. The Fields Medal is often considered a mathematical equivalent to the Nobel Prize.'b'The Wolf Prize in Mathematics, instituted in 1978, recognizes lifetime achievement, and another major international award, the Abel Prize, was instituted in 2003. The Chern Medal was introduced in 2010 to recognize lifetime achievement. These accolades are awarded in recognition of a particular body of work, which may be innovational, or provide a solution to an outstanding problem in an established field.'b'A famous list of 23 open problems, called "Hilbert\'s problems", was compiled in 1900 by German mathematician David Hilbert. This list achieved great celebrity among mathematicians, and at least nine of the problems have now been solved. A new list of seven important problems, titled the "Millennium Prize Problems", was published in 2000. A solution to each of these problems carries a $1\xc2\xa0million reward, and only one (the Riemann hypothesis) is duplicated in Hilbert\'s problems.'
